Time to draw again.
Remember that we had our widget tree and we had our element tree and also our render tree
but we can ignore this for now.
Now in our widget tree, we have our list builder
and in there, we have the list items that are created, right. Now in the element tree,
a new element is created for every widget
as you learned. You also learned that the state for stateful widgets is created as a separate object
and attached or referenced to or by the element.
So the state for this list item here and the state object for the second list item, that is connected
to our elements and the elements also of course point at our widgets here as you learned.
Now what happens when we delete a widget?
Let's say we deleted this list item here,
so therefore, this widget indeed was removed. The state here however was not immediately removed.
Now I told you that when a widget is removed permanently from the widget tree, its state also is deleted
and we certainly deleted this widget permanently but the state is only deleted after Flutter determined
that this element here is not needed anymore, because the state is attached to the element, not to the
widget itself.
So let's see how Flutter checks whether this element is still needed.
Remember that it holds some information in each element, it holds information about the the child elements
of each element,
so this connection in the end and it holds information about the type of widget.
So if we have a ListView here and then this widget here is a list item and this widget here is a
list item, then the data it stored in the element is not just its relation to other elements but also
that this element belongs to a ListView and this element here belongs to an item and this element here
belongs to an item.
Now when Flutter rebuilds the widget tree, it also checks the element tree and sees if it needs to change
something which in the end then leads to a change on the screen. It goes through that tree from top to bottom
and then it first checks the ListView. The ListView element is here,
is there still a ListView widget on the same level?
And yes, that is the case,
we still have a ListView here, we have a ListView here.
So it goes to the next layer and it sees I have an item here,
is there still an item on the same level
Well of course, this item here was deleted but that simply means that this item here goes up,
right?
It's a list,
so this item, the second item simply is now the first and the only item in the list.
So actually Flutter answers this question with a yes because it still finds an item here on the same level
this old item was at
and that's why the state is not deleted because it still finds a widget that belongs to this element
here,
we still have an item widget here,
this one and it simply updates the reference.
Well and then it checks this last element here
and of course now since this item here moved up, it no longer finds a fitting widget and therefore, it
deletes this item in this state,
this is what Flutter does now.
The problem with all of that of course is that
this state here, for the second element, for the first and only item element here, this state is kept around
because Flutter determined that this item here still had a matching widget, this widget down there
but of course this state previously belonged to the now deleted item
and for example in our case, stored the background color of the CircleAvatar.
So we dropped the wrong state,
this state was dropped but that's wrong,
we should have dropped this yellow state here, this one but we didn't.
So we need some way of telling Flutter that actually items are not just identified by type but also
by something else,
so that when we remove one item, Flutter doesn't think that it should keep this element here,
this one around just because the type is the same as the type it now finds on the widget there
but it also should check, is it the same, really the same item? Not just the same type but really the same
item with the same data that's stored in there
and thankfully, Flutter gives us a tool for passing this extra information to an element.